All right guys so we're gonna jump in to CSX grid here and I've created a whole new folder called CSX
grid sandbox.
And when I create a new file called 0 1 underscore grid underscore columns dot h t AML and we're gonna
go over just the basics of how the grid works.
Also the grid template columns property.
So I'm going to close the sidebar up and will generate our boilerplate here.
Let's say grid columns and style and the fact that you know flex blocks if you've been following along
with the course is going to benefit you because the grid works in a similar way where we take a parent
element and we set display grid just like we would do display flex.
And it makes all the child elements of that of that parent.
It makes them grid items and then we can add specific properties on the parent to affect the grid items.
So let's go ahead and create our mark up.
I'm just gonna do a class of grid.
This is gonna be the container.
And it does it doesn't matter what you call the class obviously I just call that grid.
And then let's do a few divs with the class of item.
So we'll just for the content we'll say item and then incrementing number and we'll do times three guys
we have three div elements inside of our container here.
So let's let's style the items first of all just so we can kind of get a better visual picture of how
this works.
So I'm going to add let's say padding.
We'll do three ram and let's do a border one pixels solid and a background of light grey.
Let's do a font size of one point three ram we'll do font weight fold and let's do text align center.
All right.
So let's save this and we'll go ahead and open the sub with live server and we just have our three element
three items here.
So what we need to do now is add for this this parent right here this div we want to add display grid.
So I'm going to say the class of grid we want to do display and then grid.
OK.
Now if I save that nothing happens it's not like flex where it automatically turns into a flex row.
What we need to do is add a another property called GRID template columns.
So let's say a grid dash template.
Dash columns.
And here's where we specify how many columns we want and also the width of those columns.
OK so basically by columns I mean we'll have one column another column so basically going in a horizontal
row.
So let's say we want to do three columns that are 200 pixels wide so 200 pixels for the first second
and third.
And if I save that that's exactly what we get.
OK so no floats or anything like that.
We simply create the number of columns we want and the width.
Now even if we have more than 3 3 great items here.
That's absolutely fine it's just going to continue on to the next line.
So if I were to copy this down and say 4 and save it's just going to go right into the next spot.
OK.
If we do two more and we say five six and save it's just going to it's just going to keep going in this
in this sequence.
All right.
So this is great for like new sites which is what one of the projects that we're going to build.
It's great for image galleries and it's just great for all just basic layout.
It's just to if you want just a main area with a side bar you simply set two columns.
All right.
Now this obviously doesn't go all the way across its container which which is container is the viewport.
But let's say we wanted the middle one to stretch so that this went all the way across.
We could use auto so if I put an auto here and I save now it's going to give it the length that it needs
to fill the container and if I stretch it out it's always going to fill its container.
OK.
And let's say I wanted them all to be the same but I wanted them to fill the container I could do this.
I mean just copy this down car comment this so and instead of doing the two hundred pixels let's do
auto let's do it three times OK so now we have three columns that are all the same size if we wanted
for we could add in another one like that.
Now there's a better way to do this if you're gonna be repeating the same width like this.
You can simply use repeats and then this takes in two things it takes in the number of times you want
to repeat which I'm going to say three and then the width.
You want to repeat which I'll do auto and save and you see we get the same result.
If I were to put let's say 200 pixels in here and save it's going to repeat 200 pixels three times.
So this is a much nicer way to do it.
Now we used pixels here you can also use other units you can use percentages but the most common unit
you're going to see when using the grid is an F R unit which is a fraction.
So it's basically a fraction of the page in it.
It works similar to how the the the Flex property works and we say flex one flex to you know it's work
similar to that.
So I'm going to copy this down and comment that out.
I just want you guys to have this as a reference.
But we can do let's say one FIA for the first row too far for the second and one far for the third and
we'll save.
And you can see that it's split up into fractions and the second one is larger and if I wanted it even
larger I could do three FDR and it will extend more.
OK.
So I wanted to do two and then maybe two on the end so we'll have one short and then two longer ones
we could do that could do any combination we want.
And of course we can do repeat with FIA as well.
And that's usually what I would do is repeat 3 1 FIA if I wanted three columns that were all the same
with.
Now notice that these are all stuck together.
Right.
So instead of adding margin there's actually a specific property we can use called GRID gap.
OK.
So we're going to say grid gap and you can put any unit here pixels whatever I'm just gonna do one room
and save and it's automatically going to add that gap.
That's spacing in between.
All right.
And there's no dealing with you know calculating widths or anything like that it just it just simply
works and it doesn't matter how how wider or narrow the browser is either.
All right.
So that's pretty much the basics of how to create a grid and create basically a horizontal row with
columns.
What I want to show you now is just how easy it is to do a simple layout like a main area and a sidebar
if you remember back to when we did the floats where we had to carefully choose the percentages we had
to clear them stuff like that.
So just want to show you how simple it is if we had let's say Main and inside main we want our main
area our content area to be a section and we'll just put an H three say Welcome to my sites and we'll
do a paragraph and say Lorem 30 and let's say we want an aside.
So this would be our sidebar we'll just say whatever Hello.
And let's say Lorem 10.
OK so we're gonna save this and we want this to be our sidebar.
So we want this to be over here.
So with the grid we could take this main because that's the parent of the section and the aside and
we could simply say display grid and we'll define our grid template columns and we'll simply do too
far for the main area or for the section and then one F5 for the aside for the sidebar and then let's
give it a grid gap of let's say one point five RAM and save and that's it.
OK.
So three lines instead of having to flow and deal with percentages it's very very simple.
If we wanted to have it split in the middle we could do one fire one fire like that OK if we wanted
this to be a little bigger we could do three Fia.
So it's very simple to manipulate how your content is displayed and how things are aligned.
All right.
So in the next video we're gonna start to look at grid rows because up to this point we've looked at
grid template columns but there's also a grid template rows.
So we're gonna get into next.